[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
[music]
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. you know, not a
novel observation here, but I do think
that if like in early 2022 or late 2021,
you had someone had revealed to you all
of the amazing things that we could do
with AI these days, I think you would
[snorts] have expected that either the
broader economy or society would be more
different than it has been. Like by and
large, you know, I think most people's
jobs are done roughly the same way. Sort
of. Society still seems to operate,
although a little maybe a little bit
worse every day. I don't know. But like
I just don't think like it's a
mind-blowing technology and yet by and
large like it hasn't had the economic
disruption that I think many people
would have guessed. Maybe I'm cynical on
this subject, but I always say never
underestimate the human capacity for uh
stasis, I guess, and making things much
more difficult than they actually need
to be
>> and putting up, you know, bureaucratic
barriers, regulatory barriers and things
like that. So, it's not
>> it's not that surprising to me, but it
is true. You have a lot of economists
out there who think there was going to
be this massive productivity boost,
right?
>> Well, it's certainly tech people like I
don't know like economists, you know,
they're like, "Oh, we're going to have a
productivity boom. we're raising our
estimates from 2% to two and a
[laughter] quarter%. And then you have
uh you know everything's relative. And
then uh you know we talked to Kathy Wood
one time and I think she what did she
predict 20% real GDP growth for 20 years
or you certainly have these people in
Silicon Valley deflationary boom post
post scarcity any uh any minute right
now. Some real gaps I would say between
how a lot of economists think about some
of these things and the numbers that an
economist would be comfortable using
versus maybe literally everyone else.
>> Kathy would certainly many others. Yeah.
>> You know what I think about is how
different would your career and my
career have been had AI existed in like
2008 2006 when we were starting to to
blog basically. It's a really good
question and I don't know the answer
because part of me thinks well you know
that whole path that was like defined my
career like would not have been there
would not have existed or no maybe but
on the other hand maybe in 2006 I would
have been like just like I was super
early into blogging super early into
experimenting with AI news and it would
look different but maybe I would have
rode some different way
>> different but the same. Yeah, different
but the same, you know, like I think
it's uh it's pretty hard to tell.
>> One thing I know is like back then we
were writing to optimize Google results,
right? That was basic or you know like I
know social media was disseminating
stuff as well, but like Google was still
the main the main platform for a lot of
stuff.
>> I'm sure if we were doing it now, we
would be optimizing for chat GPT or
Perplexity or someone like that to
actually pick up the content.
>> I mean, I think
>> that's the audience now.
>> Yeah, it is. And I think like any
especially any like commercial
publisher, right, that's trying to do at
scale. I think like a sort of niche
voice expert could still have like their
audience that comes to them directly,
but like at scale
>> scale
>> for sure. Every publisher is trying to
figure this out. Anyway,
>> we really do have the perfect guest.
Someone we should have had on the
podcast years and years ago. I I it's
almost surprising that this is the first
time we've had him on.
>> It is crazy.
>> It is crazy. But it is someone who I
think is like at the intersection of
everything that we're talking about
because he's an economist. Uh he knows
the tech really well. The tech people
know him. The tech people love him. He
may even be one of the the preferred
economists for uh this I I feel he's
like the economist that all the people
in the AI world want to get his take. A
longtime blogger, someone I you know
like both of us sort of gave up on like
blogging although we have our
newsletter. It's like close enough but
it's different than blogging. Someone
who stuck with the medium for a long
time. one of the true original econ
bloggers that I've been reading for over
20 years. We're going to be speaking
with Tyler Cohen. He is the host of the
Conversations with Tyler podcast. He
also obviously is one of the two
bloggers at the famous marginal
revolution blog, uh economics professor
at GMU, appreciator of uh ethnic foods
all around the uh DC, Northern Virginia,
Maryland area, someone uh known on the
internet for a long time. Tyler, thank
you so much for uh coming on OddLots.
really uh thrilled to have you here.
>> Hello. Happy to be here.
>> Amazing. What do you think about my
initial assessment? How fair do you
think it is that like had you known in
2021 how powerful these tools would be,
maybe we'd be a bit surprised that by
and large like business seems to more or
less run the same?
>> I'm not surprised at all. So, what I see
right now is people using AI as an
add-on to their pre-existing work
routines. Oh, you need to write a memo.
You ask AI how to do it. You need to
write a column. You ask AI to proofread
it or fact check it. And that works
great. But those are marginal gains.
What we really need to see a major
impact is new organizations built around
AI. And those will be startups. They
will come only slowly. It will take, you
know, 20 or more years before they
really transform the economy. And in the
meantime, it's a whole bunch of add-ons,
which are fun and fine, but that's why I
think it's slow.
>> What can you tell us about the history
of technology such that legacy
organizations that existed prior to the
invention of maybe potentially
revolutionary new technology have a hard
time massively changing their workflows?
>> Well, you can take even very simple
examples. So Toyota starts competing
with General Motors in the 1970s.
General Motors is paralyzed. It cannot
really come back and adopt the new and
superior Toyota methods. And those are
not really that different compared to
say AI.
>> So there's just plenty plenty examples.
Old mainstream media could not cope very
well with the internet. There are
exceptions like the New York Times. Uh
Oddlot's podcast would be another.
>> Thank you.
>> But it's the norm. So we're seeing it
again with AI and again you need a
complete turnover of who and what is
doing business for it to really matter
on a big scale.
>> If you're if you need that complete
turnover and you need some time for AI
to become fully embedded in a business
model or for a business model to form
around AI, what industry or what part of
the economy would you expect it I guess
to show up first in that sort of
revolutionary way?
Well, we have obvious data on this and
it's programming. You will hear people
who do programming claim that say 80% of
the work is now done by AIS. I suspect
that's an overstatement, but there's no
doubt at all that there's simply a lot
of programming already done by AIS. When
you have low fixed costs, a competitive
sector, immediate feedback, you know,
the revenue has to flow. Programming and
also New York City finance. There's been
quants in finance for a long time. Those
quants are now, you could say, more AI
equipped than they used to be and those
areas already are being revolutionized.
>> I've heard um and we and got some
pitches to do episodes which we should
do at some point, but I've heard about
like some law firms that are being like
a like new AI law firms where there are
lawyers etc. But from the very ground
up, the idea is perhaps there is some
way to just get way more productivity if
they start from the very beginning with
some combination of lawyers plus AI
models. It seems like that could be the
kind of thing where maybe the legacy law
firms are seeing some productivity gains
from AI. There's probably some evidence
you can find, but that a very a new one
with a totally different approach could
deliver that that big productivity boost
that actually ends up changing the
industry. It's already the case, say
mid-tier associates are much less
needed. But there's one big problem with
law in particular, and that is the way
large language models work now. You have
to send your queries somewhere else. You
can't just own and control and hold the
whole thing on your hard drive. Now I
think within a few years time that will
be very different but until then major
law firms are extremely skittish about
just typing in their questions and
sending it you know to San Francisco. I
don't actually think there's a risk, but
when you think about how fiduciary
responsibility [music] works, they just
don't want to do it.
[music]
talk more about I guess privacy concerns
and regulation because this seems to be
an area where if you are in a heavily
regulated industry or if you're just in
an industry that tends to be full of
paranoid people like lawyers, it does
seem like there's going to be a natural
tendency to be very very cautious when
it comes to sharing data with AI. You're
going to be worried about actual data
ownership, the queries that you're
sending to San Francisco, as you say.
Are those industries just inevitably
going to be slow to adapt?
They'll be slow to adapt again until the
point where they just control their own
model and they, you know, hold it within
the firm and no one else really can get
at it. So what you need is cheaper
models where a law firm can afford to
have its own model. And I think that's a
few years away. It's not a very long
time away, but it won't come in six
months. Uh Sam Alman, I just did a
podcast with him and he said a privacy
problem is AI queries are subject to
subpoena and he thinks they should have
as much protection as say your
conversation with your lawyer or your
doctor or your therapist. I think that's
a good idea, but that hasn't happened
yet. And until it happens or you get the
whole thing on your own hard drive,
progress in law is going to be slow. But
once the progress comes, that's one of
the areas where I think AI has the most
promise. It's just very very good at
mastering a large corpus of text and
organizing it for you.
>> It is interesting, isn't it? Where it's
like, okay, if you were my lawyer, you
and I could have a conversation and it
would be not it would not be uh
>> it'd be privileged. Yeah, it would be
privileged or you know one can have
conversations with anyone and as long as
you're doing it on the phone or if
you're doing it personto person it's
much more difficult to get that uh you
know in discovery or I always think
about this with uh you know public um
public records of employees that
sometimes you can get their emails
through foyers etc but you can't get the
convers content of conversations. It
does feel I hadn't really thought about
this dynamic though that when you're
using an AI it is sort of like a
conversation and yet sort of from an
evidentiary basis it would be much more
like an email.
>> I think when it comes to medical issues
there are many more people willing to
share their data. Not everyone by any
means some medical conditions are secret
or people just don't want others to
know. But I see many many people I know
typing in all kinds of things about
their medical history to say GPT5 and
getting what are on the whole very good
answers. It's like medical diagnosis for
free. Uh spreading now to the whole
world a lot of countries where people
just don't even have access to good
doctors at all. And I think that will be
important more quickly than the law
innovations.
>> Just as a thought experiment, what does
all of this mean for insurers? Because I
kind of think, you know, I think about a
bunch of people typing in their medical
information. I think about basically the
explosion in data that we have nowadays.
And it seems like the insurance industry
would be one place that would really
benefit from all this trove of
additional information if they could
access it.
>> Well, this is one of my worries about AI
in general. I'm quite positive on what's
happening. But as insurers get better
and better information on their
customers, this is just through big data
more generally. It doesn't have to be
current large language models. Uh they
know exactly how to write the risk and
how to price the premium. And in a sense
for the buyer, it's not insurance
anymore.
>> So if we know your house is going to
burn down with high probability and you
have to pay the super high premium, you
don't really have the benefits of the
insurance. So some insurance markets
might unravel if through big data uh the
insurers learn too much about what's
likely to happen. Economists seem to be
very consistent about the effects of
technology on labor demand, which is
that in the end it washes out. Right?
Some people, okay, there's disruption,
but I'm going to save money because I
used AI, but that means I have more
spending power and then I'm going to buy
something else that I wouldn't have
bought had it not been for uh paying
wages. And then that'll create demand
for labor elsewhere. And so in the end,
the idea that you could really have
techdriven
unemployment at scale that is not
transitory or not temporary is hard. A
lot of economists seem to be intuitively
skeptical of this idea. Whereas you have
people in the AI field 50% of the people
aren't going to have jobs. We need UBI
otherwise there's going to be a
permanent underclass. Could there be
something different about AI such that
it doesn't have the same labor market
effects that past technologies have had?
>> I would say you understand me well. So
the energy sector, there's going to be a
lot of new jobs taking care of older
people. I think as AI produces more
potential medical innovations, we'll
need to test them. So the biomedical
sector testing clinical trials, there'll
be a lot new jobs. Uh, I'm not worried
about mass unemployment and most
economists are not and I agree with
their perspectives which I think you
outlined pretty clearly.
>> What do you say though? Because I'm I I
I have a feeling that when you're out in
San Francisco, they don't see it that
way. Like, and they they they talk a lot
and some of them are more in, you know,
UBI talk and permanent underclass talk
and all of this stuff. Do they see your
perspective when you make this case?
what do they say or what do they what
are a lot of them seem to be missing
about the logic that you spell out?
>> Well, I think more and more they're
coming around to the economist's point
of view. So, Andre Karpathy who was at
OpenAI, you know, in the most important
years, he just did a podcast saying he
thinks adjustment will be slow, things
will be fine, we'll grow at 2 point
something percent, there won't be mass
unemployment. And you wouldn't have
heard that say two years ago but I think
as people see the models rolling out and
as you mentioned well the real world
impact it is stretched out in time right
it's not all immediate
>> uh earlier on people had more the sense
that AI was a kind of god box yeah that
you just talk to it and it can magically
do anything and convert that into
results in the real world but if you
think about your actual job even if it's
a highly intellectual job so much of
what you do is the interaction between
your intellect your physical presence,
your interactions with others, your
travel,
>> many other things. And until we get to
some far far off world where the robots
are perfect copies of you, which I don't
think ever will come, uh jobs will be
fine, but they will change a lot. And
I'm actually worried about who will be
the biggest losers. Uh I think poor
people will do great. uh the very
wealthy will do well but people who are
sort of upper upper middle class will
find this automatic ticket to a law or
consulting job that assured they would
be upper upper middle class for the rest
of their lives. I think a lot of that is
going away already.
>> I think also no one would have expected
plastic surgery I guess to be a
beneficiary of the AI revolution. But if
you think that what's going to matter in
the future is like your personal
presence and your network of social
contacts, then I guess we should all be
working on our on looks maxing.
Absolutely.
>> Right.
>> Um
>> charisma.
>> Charisma. Okay. Noted everyone work on
their respective charisma.
>> One thing I was wondering is the impact
of AI on public finances. I am not very
good at tax policy. Um Joe knows this
because I've complained about taxes to
him uh repeatedly, but I'm thinking
>> maybe that means you're really good at
tax, [laughter]
>> but if you're thinking about where the
value ad of AI actually shows up in the
economy, so you know, presumably you get
a productivity boost. We're not entirely
sure how much that's going to be, but
where does that additional output
actually show up in terms of revenue for
governments? How is that collected? And
how would you expect the distribution to
vary across the world?
Well, I think in the United States
medium-term there'll just be much much
more health care
>> there'll be new drugs, new medical
devices. Uh we'll have to test all these
things. We'll have to produce them and
that will be it was already the case
that those sectors were growing but that
growth will be accelerated.
>> So that's where I think there'll be the
biggest difference longer term and
people will live longer because we'll
fix at least partially various diseases
and maladies. So if you live to be 94
across a lifetime you spend way more on
health care than if you live to be 77.
And that's yet further growth for the
health care sector.
>> But some things like medical diagnosis
that's already very cheap like you know
a good large language model probably
outperforms your current doctor at least
if you type in what's wrong with you
properly. But does that additional
productivity or the output generated by
AI does that actually show up in
additional taxation for the government?
>> Well, the healthc care sector generates
an enormous amount of taxation revenue.
I do think we'll have some sectors that
maybe just become free in the same way
that Wikipedia is free. So I could
imagine say 10 or 20% of the music
sector is music you create at home using
your own AI and it's a customized song
for you and maybe you paid a
subscription for the service but rather
than you know spending more money on
Spotify or a streaming service you just
build the music and that's a partial
substitute for some human created music.
I don't think human created music will
go away at all. People want to enjoy the
human touch, the feeling that you're a
fan of Taylor Swift or whatever. Uh, but
there's going to be a lot of AI
generated music and art and many other
areas and some of it will be free. Uh,
but that's not a problem from a revenue
standpoint. So instead of spending money
on, say, buying a picture, you create
one digitally at home with your AI,
you'll spend that money on something
else.
>> I got to ask now, are you a Swifty?
No, it's boring for me. It's a little
too predictable. So, I I I have to say
I'm not. But I'm glad other people are.
Let's put it that way.
>> Do you have a theory? Actually, let's
talk Let's just talk about music. Uh do
you have like a a theory of the Swift
phenomenon? Like, is there a reason?
What is it? Because it's just so it
doesn't I don't know. What's your what's
your meta take on the the Taylor the
Swifties and culture in society?
Well, it's super polished and because of
the internet, the very biggest of
celebrities can be much bigger than
before and someone will fill a few of
those slots. But I think also how she
presents herself. She has the guise of
being attractive without feeling
threatening to other women.
Uh, and there's something all American
about her and quite generic. She doesn't
rule out the fandom of that many people.
>> And she's the one who's filled that
slot. She's been brilliant at managing
her career and seems to just stick at it
and has an incredible work ethic. People
say the shows are incredible. As more
and more life goes online, who can give
a good show? It's the charisma and looks
point. Well, she seems A+ at that. I've
never been to one, but I hear plenty of
reports. And you put all that together
and she's, you know, the mega star of
the music world.
>> Do you think like culture, like there's
this popular idea that culture is sort
of dead? And I do think that is probably
overstated, but you know, you look at
movies and people have people have
observed this for a long time. It's just
rehashes of franchises that have been
around for 30 years. And I think if you
look at Spotify streaming, there's still
this overwhelming tyranny of the boomer
rock, etc. And this feeling that culture
in many respects is this rehash that
it's very hard for new things to break
out. I mean, Taylor Swift at this point
is a decades old phenomenon.
Is that real in your view or is that
just people in the pundit class who have
been lazy and not discovering new things
and not actually putting in the effort
because they're not young anymore and
they're not going out and they say
nobody listens to new music?
>> Joe, are you just talking about
yourself?
>> Yeah, I'm half talking about I'm trying
I'm doing a little introspection here.
Is this just me because I don't go to
shows like I did when I was 20 or
something changed?
>> But a lot of it is the pundit class. So
you look at movies, I think it's
perfectly correct to say the most
popular movies today are pretty
dreadful. And it used to be the case
that the most popular movies were God
The Godfather and Star Wars. That's a
big change.
>> But if you look at movie making around
the world and in a given year list, say
the 25 best movies from all places,
which may not even come to your
multiplex, every year you have an
incredible list. I don't think they're
worse than the movies of earlier times.
I do think mainstream Hollywood is much
worse. So, in many areas, you just have
quality moving more into niches.
>> By the way, I just want to say the first
time I ever encountered your work um
prior to even having stumbled across
marginal revolution was uh at the uh
bookstore in Austin, finding a copy of
In Praise of Commercial Culture. And I
just feel like that book has held up so
well. I mean in the specific sense that
there is so much mass culture these days
whether it's high-end Netflix TV shows
etc whether it's A24 films whether it's
uh Beyonce or Taylor Swift or some of
these other big names who are
simultaneously incredibly popular and I
get that you're not a Swifty neither am
I anymore but um people take this yeah I
I I like their country fans when she
left country once she left country I but
like where people take these uh popular
culture things extremely seriously as
art and don't dismiss these outputs as
sort of being trash.
>> Right now we're in a golden age for
country and western music and also
horror movies.
>> Neither is really like my taste in
particular,
>> but it's easy to see what has gotten
worse and especially for critics harder
to see what has been getting better.
>> That's my sweet spot. Country and uh
horror is perfect for me. Um, but just
on the culture point, I mean, I think
the lack of culture argument, the one I
hear the most is it's a lack of shared
culture, right? So, you do have like
some giant monoliths like a Swift or a
Beyonce that everyone knows about and,
you know, they do have these large
audiences, but
>> broadly, we're not all experiencing the
same media that we used to, right? Like,
no one is gathering around the TV to
watch the finale of, you know, some show
that airs like once a week and has been
going on for 5 years. The exception is
NFL football, which I don't really get
it, but yeah, but it's not cultural.
>> Sports is outside of my
>> expectations. And the Super Bowl is
cultural, right? It's a cultural event.
You care about the advertisements, but
the biggest you of YouTube stars, which
again, I would say is not personally my
thing, but they can have bigger
audiences than those older TV shows did,
>> right? Well, so what I'm getting at is
it does feel like nowadays there's an
ability because of tech to serve up very
specific content and like niche content
in streams. And the the analogy that I
like to use is, you know, everyone knows
if you download Netflix for the first
time, the first movie you watch is
incredibly important because whatever
you watch, you know, if it's a romcom,
you're going to be served up Kate Hudson
films for the rest of your life, right?
like the algorithm looks at what you're
watching and then it serves up that
additional content. What does that mean
for society? The idea that you have
people, you know, basically funneled
into smaller and smaller streams in some
respect.
>> Well, a lot of the Netflix algorithm, it
just directs you to slop.
>> True.
>> A lot of people have always wanted slop.
Like people listen to music way back
when and it was quite common. or they
would just listen to top 40 which in
some years was very good but often was
pretty terrible even in the 1960s. So
what you can do today is basically watch
not any movie out there but you have
movie you can still buy DVDs and
Blu-rays.
>> Uh you have access to more cinema today
>> uh than you ever have. So people will
sort themselves and I think it's from
the point of view of cultural
consumption. I don't think there's ever
been a better time to be alive than
right now.
>> I like that.
>> Well, a lot of people abuse that and go
for slop. Of course, that's sad, but
it's hardly new.
>> So, changing gears a little bit, Tracy
and I write almost every day because we
have a daily newsletter that forces us
to. And I really like having that
because I don't know if I would write
every day if I did not have that
obligation
um to deliver something in people's
inbox that they pay for as part of their
bloomberg.com subscription. I love
writing, but I don't know if I would do
it every day if I didn't have this sort
of requirement. I might just tweet. How
do you You've been blogging for over 20
years. How do you avoid the temptation
to just fire off all your ideas via
tweet and actually commit to the blog?
I'm never tempted to do that. I like to
think things out. I do too. I just don't
>> more
>> when I write properly. I've actually
blogged every single day for over 22
years.
That's amazing. Most people gave up. And
so what's the difference?
>> I don't feel it requires any discipline
for me. The discipline is not writing
more. Like I have to restrain myself. So
I I guess I'm just weird. I I don't
think I have any like neat little trick
or formula. Uh, it's one of these niches
that you can do now that you couldn't do
before and I found my niche as have the
two of you.
>> Here's a slightly different question
playing on that theme, but going back to
the intro, how different do you think
your blogging career would have been had
chat bots existed, you know, 10 or 20
years ago when you were starting out?
>> I don't think we know yet. My intuition
is that people still want to read human
writers simply because they're human.
And if the bot is as good as you, most
of the world doesn't care. But that has
not truly been tested yet. I think we'll
see in the next two years. But that's
what I'm expecting. Just I think I think
in music there'll be plenty of AI music.
It might be say 10 or 20% of the music
sector, but listeners will still want
that human to human connection.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Do you think um you know when when
Twitter came out they called they called
it a micro blogging site as if it were
just blogging but on a shorter basis but
I think it's fundamentally different you
know in the early the glory days of
blogs which we'll be talking about
forever when we're all very old people
how good it was you know I think there
was this sort spirit of um you know
liberal linking with each other and idea
exploration whereas Twitter strikes me
as much more conflictual and oneups
oneupmanship and so forth. Do you think
there are like fundamental I don't know
if political is the right word but like
new uh communication paradigms like sort
of have their own teroir so to speak in
terms of the impulse towards
collaboration or conflict etc. And does
that change society?
Yeah, I still like blogging and I'm sad
people have moved away from it. Twitter
to me it seems too memeheavy and
memeheavy media have more potential for
racism which of course is a big negative
and I see so many people who are driven
crazy by being on Twitter.
>> Whether it's because they're writing on
it or reading it, I'm not sure. Maybe
both. I don't want to name names, but
it's a lot of people and I bet you see
the same ones that I do.
>> Also very sexist nowadays. I would just
add um in unappreciated ways,
>> many ways.
>> Speaking of sexism, um the impact of AI
on economics, talk about that. Economic
institutions, you know, famous for
modeling and spend a lot of time with
numbers and things like that. Is that
all just going to be replaced by AI?
>> Not all. So, I think what human
economists will do is put more and more
time into gathering data and feeding it
to the AIs. The returns to doing that
will be very high. But the actual
econometrics, statistics, humans will
maybe set up part of the problem. But
the hard boring routine work will be
done by the machines as to some extent
it was already the case and this will be
a way to make a lot of progress rather
quickly.
>> Do the actual economic statistics or
data points that economists collect, do
some of those need to be changed or
thought of differently in light of the
AI era?
Well, I I don't know. Eventually, they
will need to be, but I would say any
period of radical change in history,
your statistics are less useful.
>> It's not that the people creating the
statistics are making some mistake. You
just cannot capture every way the world
is changing. And index number
comparisons require the basket of goods
be relatively close to constant. And at
some point, that doesn't hold anymore.
And we'll be faced with that. We'll deal
with it. I would say the current
statistics we have, they're more
underrated than overrated. So, they're
actually pretty good.
>> I'll be glad when we get them back
again.
>> This is another thing. The tech people
you talk to, they must think like GDP is
terrible. It doesn't capture all this
stuff, all this value that we can't
price. I'm sure you've had conversations
explaining to many AI workers that uh
GDP is not the worst statistic in the
world. I want to go back though to um so
you know, you mentioned like on Twitter,
right? You say something, someone posts
a meme, they dunk on you, they make fun
of you, they whatever, your chatbot
won't do that. Like if I'm having a
conversation with Chad GBT, it's never
going to respond to me with a meme sort
of indicating that one day it might that
I'm a
>> It'll learn your language, Joe.
>> Yeah, but if anything, it's too
obsequious, right? I mean, the issue is
like the online world has become this
very like sort of competitive
conflictual world and then I go to the
chatbot and my complaint is literally
the opposite. It doesn't challenge me
enough. It's too obsequious. Every
question I ask, it's great question.
Sometimes I wish it would call me a
a little bit more. But what does
it change about the world? And we know
that like many people's brains have been
broken by social media. And that
probably has downstream effects on how
our politics operates these days. What
does it do to the world if we start
inhabiting these chat environments where
they're just very sort of polite and
every time you say something it says,
"Yes, great thought, Tyler. Great
thought, Joe. Would you like to expand
it? You asked the perfect question. What
do you see that having sort of
secondorder effects on how society
operates?
>> Well, that's the four row model that
does that. The newer models like Clawude
4.5 and GDP5, they're more objective and
that's better,
>> but they never make fun of you. They
never will like say you're a How
could you possibly how could you
possibly ask such a dumb question? You
are obviously so out of touch for having
the ax ask this. This is like a ve in
some respects this is a very positive
change from mo many of the conversations
that I've had from typing into a
computer.
>> Oh, it's great. I think people should be
nicer to each other. And I think they're
the most objective media source the
human race ever has had. If you ask it
about say vaccines or conspiracy
theories, it basically gives you the
right answers. Well, one thing that they
don't do and I mean I do think they can
be trained to be mean to you and to
insult you to a certain degree and you
can decide
>> they could be but I never encountered
them.
>> Try try hard that more readily on tap.
Right.
>> So we spoke to um the business chief
business officer of perplexity Dmitri
Chevaleno. We spoke to him recently and
he was saying that one thing chat models
can't do is express a natural curiosity
which I thought was kind of weird coming
from him cuz perplexity is the only
model I know that actually throws out
those additional questions if you query
it and then it comes up with would you
like
>> to have more information on this point
or are you thinking about this now?
>> But there does seem to be an element of
creativity perhaps that is lost in some
of these LLMs. How much does that change
things in media? the idea that you know
the models are going to spit out
something that's sort of predestined in
many ways.
>> Well, that's what most humans do to be
clear, [laughter] but it's now the case
that on a regular basis the models say
can prove new theorems in math or
discover new potential drugs. And keep
in mind, you know, a year ago, these
things thought the word strawberry had
two Rs and now they're winning gold
medals and math Olympiads. [laughter]
So, a year or two from now, maybe we
don't know how much better they'll be,
but I don't think they're going to have
any problems being creative. Certainly
more creative than humans on average.
>> So, now I have to ask, since we're
talking about being mean or nice to the
models and them being mean or nice to
you, do you say please and thank you in
your LLM queries?
>> You know, I used to and then Sam Alman
said, "Well, it costs [laughter] us just
a little bit of money because of the
extra tokens." And then I thought, I'll
hold off on this, but I have this
pre-existing record of saying please,
and it knows that. And then it knows I
stopped when Sam said to [laughter]
stop. And I think I'll get points for
both of those decisions.
>> See, I actually find if you're slightly
meaner to the models in your queries,
they perform slightly better. Much like
interacting with Joe. [laughter]
>> No com no comment on that. I you know
what I do? I have said which is I'll
like um I'll have a query and it'll
respond and I'll say that was a little
on the nose wasn't it like it like it
over
>> I'll say do better perplexity and then
it does
>> yeah I've said like do I've said things
like that it's like this is really on
the nose this this response was a little
bit trit don't you think etc like I do
feel like I've gotten more comfortable
at uh let's be let's be real here you're
not doing you're not doing your best uh
job here. What do you think is like it's
interesting they like I get that they
they win the gold medals and the math
and etc. Like I've had so many
conversations with the chat bots that
are on some level like mindblowing the
what the capabilities. I've never seen
an chatbot query that is like
interesting like that is like oh that is
like a really in maybe one I could think
of but there was like a really
interesting thought. I feel like my
children still say on a daily basis more
like interesting things that get me
thinking than I've ever gotten from a
chatbot. Does that resonate to you at
all?
>> I don't know.
>> I think I feel like you've said so many
more things in this hour than any than
any interesting like in actually like
interesting ideas than I've ever got
from the hours I've spent playing with
Chad GPT or Claude.
>> You know, I use mine a lot for music. So
if I'm going to listen to Sibelius's
fifth symphony, I'll just ask it what
should I listen for and I'll say this is
Tyler Cowan asking which I
[clears throat] hope raises the quality
of the answer. It knows a lot about me.
>> Yeah.
>> And what it gives me to listen for I
find is better than any human source I
can access readily.
>> It's better. I that I agree with. But
like does it make a connection? Does it
like tell you something about Sibilius's
music that is like, "Oh, that's a very
interest. That's a novel way of thinking
about what makes it profound." These are
the things that I rarely ever encounter.
Something that's like, "Oh, that is an
interesting thought." Whereas I feel
like if I were talking to a musicologist
for an hour, I would get infinitely more
like actual insight into something that
makes the music special, something I
hadn't heard before.
>> I don't know if it's novel because I
don't really know the Sibelius
literature. Uh, but most musicologists I
find pretty boring [laughter]
and I find say GPT5 on a classical
symphony quite to the point. And whether
or not it's original, it's not that
important to me. It helps me listen to
the music better. Yeah.
>> And it's certainly original relative to
the other sources at my disposal, say
Wikipedia or what I could Google to. So
I think for almost all purposes that's
enough. Does it have a truly original
idea in the sense that Einstein's theory
of relativity when he came up with it
was original to him? Uh I don't think
so. That may come in some number of
years.
>> But again for almost all purposes that's
not what we need. We need something
better than our pre-existing state of
knowledge. And on that I think it just
cleans up.
So, I just asked Perplexity what music I
should recommend to Tyler Cowen. And it
said that in order to recommend
effectively to Tyler Cowen, I need to
look for underappreciated recordings and
obscure things that no one except him
might have ever heard about. Um, and
>> good answer.
>> And it recommended
I mean, Boy Genius seems pretty on the
on the nose. Yeah. Right. Um, reggae
acts like Tootses and the Metals.
>> Oh, yeah. This is so This is Prior. I've
seen them in concert.
>> Yeah. Tyler to all 20 of the records.
>> So, it's just scraping stuff that you've
already talked about.
>> It's not It's not even trying.
>> Yeah. All right. Well,
>> but you need to make the prompt more
exacting. Rule out anything Tyler has
talked or written about.
>> Give me something he doesn't know
>> and try GPT5 in the pro mode.
>> Yeah.
>> And I think it will succeed. Well, so on
this note, this is something I've been
asking everyone, but like what is an
example in your mind of a really good
prompt or one that sticks out to you
that has generated something that you
know maybe you didn't expect?
>> You know, Darkesh Patel once wrote a
very good prompt and he shared it with
me. When I interview some podcast
guests, it's really a long prompt. It's,
you know, hundreds of words
>> and it asks what questions should I ask
them? Then it goes into great detail. It
should be a unique question. It should
be a question they were not asked
anywhere else. Then it's give me what
you think their answer might be and what
would be my follow-up question and yeah
give you know give me some cases where
you think their answer might be wrong
and it goes on and on
>> and you run that through the very best
models I think you get good results.
>> Yeah. No, I've uh I you know I've run uh
transcripts of the podcast before and I
say like well where should I have pushed
the guest harder on what were the weak
answers that they what were the
inconsistencies that the guest had over
the time and I've found it to be a very
useful exercise for things like that. So
I do think like that's the thing which
is for it is it is uh objectively
impressive on many of these fronts and I
would say objectively useful if you do
sort of a detailed prompting. I'm just
curious what do you what's your like um
as a prof from the professor perspective
what do you think is the right way to
think about how students will be using
uh chadi I mean I know that there's a
million opinions in academia about
what's the right way to test now what's
the right way to deal with essays etc
how are you thinking about some of these
challenges
>> we should devote onethird of all higher
education to teaching students how to
use AI high and right now that's close
to zero.
So we don't have the faculty who can
teach it as part of the problem. Often
the students know more than the
professors.
>> Yeah, I'm sure.
>> But what about we need to restructure
radically what we do because future work
will be done with AIS. So that's the
thing to teach. But like so just to play
devil's advocate like I intuitively I
still feel like there is value in
long periods of time cut off reading
where you're not looking at devices
where you're training your body to sort
of be disciplined and pay attention and
focus. I still think um memorization of
facts and numbers and dates and places
and names is very useful and actually
having them in your head etc. Does that
seem right to you or is that sort of uh
retro thinking on my part?
>> No. Strong agree and most of all
writing. But that's the other two-thirds
of higher ed, right? I said one third
should be
>> tell us about the other two/3s.
>> We should with or without AI just teach
students much more and much better how
to write. Most people can't write.
Writing is thinking. We should do much
more to teach writing and test writing.
And now with AI that has to be face tof
face in a controlled environment or
people are just going to cheat. So that
we should have doubled down on to begin
with.
>> Yeah.
>> So that and just numeracy and basic
issues like how to manage a portfolio,
what kind of mortgage to take out. There
are classes that cover those things, but
I think they ought to be front and
center of any curriculum. basic finance,
basic life decisions like how to choose
a doctor, how to prompt the AI, you
know, for diagnosis, whatever, are
relatively neglected in a lot of
education. That to me just seems crazy.
>> I want to ask one market question before
we go, which is obviously there's a lot
of talk about an AI bubble at the
moment. And I think the concern from a
lot of people is when you start talking
about a new technology as revolutionary,
when you start talking about how you
know the effects are basically going to
be infinite and the market size is
hypothetically the entire world, there's
a risk that uh expectations overshoot
reality, right? And we have seen some
people voicing their worries about that
right now and a little bit of
nervousness creeping into the market in
terms of valuations. Where do you stand
on the AI bubble? Do you see signs of
froth or do you think most of the capex
spending is uh justified at this point?
>> I don't like the word bubble. I would
point out that tech sector
[clears throat] earnings are exceeding
tech sector cap capital expenditure.
This is not mostly debt financed. So
we're in less trouble than many people
think. It wouldn't shock me if a lot of
these efforts lost money. That was the
case with the railroads, the case with
the internet, case with most things
humans have done. Uh, but I think it
will endure. It's not like Pets.com
where the thing just gets swept away.
Uh, these are incredibly well-
capitalized, highly skilled companies
where the CEOs and or founders are quite
committed to doing this and they're
going to see it through and they're
going to succeed. But does that mean
every share value will go up or Nvidia
ends up being worth$10 trillion? I don't
know. I wouldn't necessarily predict
that. There's always ups and downs. Uh
but this is clearly a very useful thing
and we're going to we as Americans we're
going to make it work and we're way
ahead of the rest of the world. Like
threequarters of all AI compute is in
this country. That's incredible. We're
what percent of the world's population?
Six or I don't know but way smaller than
threequarters.
>> GPT5 on thinking mode says you should
listen to Michael Glesian who does dream
like acoustic guitar using an open
tuning. And it said that given your uh
affinity for guitarists like John Fehee
and Leo Kodki, you'll appreciate him.
>> Send me that answer. It it sounds
excellent. I haven't heard of that
person. I do very much like guitar with
open tuning.
>> Kishori Amanar, a Hindustani vocal
singer. Um it thinks you'll like Sun O
MD Brewhawk. I'll send you this list.
And Katarina Barbieri, modern modular
minimist electronic composition. So,
>> I will buy some of these, but son know I
already know. I just
>> How about a human recommendation?
>> Oh, yeah. Give us a recommendation.
>> A human recommendation since you said
that, you know, country is pretty good
right now, but I guess you personally
aren't that into it. But have you tried
Orville Peek?
>> I think there's a new album out out uh
this week, I think.
>> What kind of music is it?
>> Country, but like a very modern type of
country. I've tried to get Joe into it,
but uh I'm still working on it.
>> I like some country and I love old
country. So Hank Williams, Johnny Cash,
Jed Atkins period.
>> It has a vintage tone to it but with a
modern twist. Try Orville Peek.
>> Okay.
>> And then get back to us about which was
better in terms of the recommendations.
>> Tyler Cohen.
>> Tyler Cohen, thank you so much for
coming on OddLot's long overdue
conversation. and uh really appreciate
you taking your time.
>> Great to chat with you both.
[music]
>> Tracy, a lot to pull out from that
conversation. I think it's very
interesting that early observation he
made about sort of legacy institutions
and whether perhaps some of the sort of
lack of revolutionary impact yet is just
about that metabolization process into
the types of companies that could
theoretically absorb them.
>> Yeah, I mean I I think that's exactly
it, right? So companies are using this
mostly as an add-on to existing
workflow. You're not going to get the
huge productivity boom until companies
are sort of centered on built from the
ground up.
>> Yeah. Which, you know, is probably going
to take people who grew up with the
technology rather than old people like
you and I and I who just adopted it. The
other thing I was thinking about, first
of all, insurers are sort of a pet
interest of mine at the moment, but I do
think like they are emerging as some of
the really big winners from a lot of
like I I guess the data saturation of
the world right now and the increased
sophistication of analytical models and
things like that. And that'll be very
interesting to see how it shakes out.
And you could if you if you took it um
very very far as a sort of thought
experiment, you could start to say that
like well the insurers are going to be a
more important actor in terms of setting
social standards and regulations in the
future because they're the ones with the
data doing all the modeling
>> and saying like you have exactly an X
chance of being in a car accident and
therefore you must do the following
things. Right. I thought also like I
hadn't really thought about um you know
uh uh um uh subpoena ability. Uh I think
it is a very big issue. But it is
interesting, right? Like it is a little
weird that you and I could have a phone
conversation. Now if you're under oath
and they say, "What did you talk about
Joe?" I expect you'd probably tell the
truth unless it was very bad for me and
I would hope that you would lie.
>> That's [laughter] right. I would hope
that you would I would hope that you
would hope I would hope that you would
perjure myself to save Joe.
>> Yeah, I would hope that you would
perjure yourself, but like you know
theoretically could get away with it.
So, but if we have an email, there's no
chance. And it's sort of interesting.
It's sort of it's always seemed a little
bit arbitrary to me. But it is
interesting to think about like okay,
can we have a conversation with these
entities and like why do we have to
leave a digital record and where are
these going to be stored? And I do think
in areas like health and law which are
obviously not obviously but sort of
intuitively lowhanging fruit for pro
productivity gains. How much have we not
seen just in part because we're still
sort of negotiating the transition
process as a society what are going to
be the new rules and norms about this
stuff where it's going to be housed etc.
I think that's actually a sort of very
interesting question or space this is
the space to watch so to speak. Now that
I think about it, we probably should
have discussed some of the regulatory
framework around all of this a little
bit more, but um next time.
>> Next time.
>> But the other thing I've been thinking
about lately is economic statistics um
in a world that's increasingly driven by
AI. And I know that we had the big
productivity discussion um and
technology in relation to technology in
like the sort of early to mid 2000s. I'm
not sure that ever actually got settled,
but I very much expect that the AI
economic statistics conversation is
going to be even like wackier because
I'm not sure how you do things like
quality adjustments for something that
like suddenly comes with its own brain.
>> Yeah.
>> And stuff like that. So,
>> no, it's going to be super weird. I did
the I I I don't know in my mind I have
like a very these images of like Tyler
getting a tour through the uh you know
chat PT offices and the people asking is
like and him having to explain that you
know we're not going to have 20% GDP
growth at maybe two and a half or sorry
productivity growth and actually GDP
isn't really that bad of a measure and
it more or less captures the size of the
economy even if a lot of internet things
are free like some of these classic
conversations
Um, I would like to be a fly on the wall
for [laughter]
some of those.
>> Tyler Cowan in defense of GDP.
>> Independent. Yeah.
>> All right. Uh, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Tyler
Cowen. He's at Tyler Cowan. [music] Uh,
and of course check out his podcast,
Conversations with Tyler of and edition
of course, Marginal Revolution. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kaleb Brooks at Kaleb Brooks. And for
more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
with the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk to Tyler Cowan and give him
music recommendations, then please leave
us a positive review on [music] your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber, you
can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely adree. All you need to do is
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast [music] and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]
>> [music]
[singing]
[music]